                    RTP Payload Format 
                                   for

         Windows Media Audio and Video

Version v1.0
End User License Agreement

RTP Payload Format for Windows Media Audio and Video, v1.0

IMPORTANT--READ CAREFULLY: This Microsoft Agreement ("Agreement") is a legal agreement
between you (either an individual or a single entity) and Microsoft Corporation ("Microsoft") for
the version of the Microsoft specification identified above which you are about to download
("Specification"). By downloading, copying, or otherwise using the Specification, you agree to be
bound by the terms of this Agreement. If you do not agree to the terms of this Agreement, do not
download, copy or otherwise use the Specification.

The Specification is owned by Microsoft or its suppliers and is protected by copyright laws and international
copyright treaties, as well as other intellectual property laws and treaties.

The capitalized terms used in this Agreement are defined as follows:

 The "Real-time Transport Protocol" (or "RTP") is a packet format for multimedia data streams.

 "Necessary Claims" means any and all claim(s), but only such claim(s), of a patent or patent application
      that (a) are owned, controlled, or sublicensable (without payment of royalties to an unaffiliated third
      party) by Microsoft now or at any future time; and (b) are necessarily infringed by implementing the
      Specification. Notwithstanding the foregoing sentence, Necessary Claims do not include any claims: (i) to
      any enabling technologies that may be necessary to make or use any product or portion thereof that
      includes an implementation of the Specification (e.g., enabling semiconductor manufacturing technology,
      compiler technology, object oriented technology, operating system technology, protocols, programming
      interfaces, etc.); or (ii) covering the implementation of other specifications, technical documentation or
      technology merely referred to in the Specification.

All other initially capitalized terms have the meanings assigned to them elsewhere in this Agreement.

1. LICENSE.

(a)  License Grant. Provided you comply with all terms and conditions of this Agreement, including

     without limitation Section 2 below, Microsoft grants you the following limited, non-exclusive,

     world-wide, royalty-free, non-assignable, nontransferable, non-sublicenseable license during the

     Term (defined below), under any copyrights owned or licensable by Microsoft without payment of

     consideration to unaffiliated third parties, to: (i) reproduce and internally use a reasonable

     number of copies of the Specification in its entirety as a reference for the sole purpose of

     implementing the Specification in your hardware, application, or utilities (your "Solutions"); (ii)

     reproduce and internally use your implementations of the Specification made pursuant to the

     terms of this Agreement (your "Implementations") solely for internal development and testing of

     your Solutions, and (iii) reproduce and have reproduced your Implementations and distribute,

     directly and indirectly, your Implementations (only in object code form) solely as part of and for

     use with your Solutions.

(b)  Necessary Claims. Provided you comply with all terms and conditions of this Agreement,

     including without limitation Section 2 below, Microsoft grants you the following limited,

     non-exclusive, world-wide, royalty-free, non-assignable, nontransferable, non-sublicenseable

     license during the Term under its Necessary Claims to make, use and distribute in object code

     form (in accordance with the distribution criteria set forth in Section 1(a)(iii) above) your

     Implementations that fully comply with the Specification.

(c)  Reserved Rights. The foregoing license is applicable only to the version of the Specification

     which hereby follows. This Agreement does not grant you any rights to any additional versions

     of or extensions to the Specification. Microsoft and its suppliers retain title and all ownership

     rights to the Specification and the information contained therein. All rights not expressly

     granted are reserved to Microsoft. Microsoft may have patents or pending patent applications,

     trademarks, copyrights, trade secrets or other intellectual property rights covering the subject

     matter in the Specification. The furnishing of this Specification does not give you any license to

     these patents, trademarks, trade secrets, copyrights, or other intellectual property rights, except

     as specifically set forth in Sections 1(a) and 1(b) above.

2. DESCRIPTION OF ADDITIONAL LIMITATIONS. Without limiting the conditions set forth in Section 1
      above, your rights under Section 1 are expressly conditioned upon your compliance with each of the
      following limitations:

(a)  You may not alter or remove any copyright, trademark or other protective notices or legends

     from any copy of the Specification.

(b)  Your Implementations as incorporated into your Solutions must implement the Specification in

     its entirety. By way of clarification of the foregoing, you are not required to implement any

     portion of the Specification that is identified as "optional". However, if you elect to implement a
     portion of the Specification that is identified as optional, you must also implement that optional
     portion of the Specification in its entirety.

(c)  For a variety of reasons, including without limitation, because you do not have the right to

     sublicense the Necessary Claims, your license rights to the Specification are conditioned upon

     your not creating or distributing your Implementations in any manner that would cause the RTP

     (whether embodied in your Implementation or otherwise) to become subject to any of the terms

     of an Excluded License. An "Excluded License" is any license that requires as a condition of use,

     modification and/or distribution of software subject to the Excluded License, that such software

     or other software combined and/or distributed with such software be (x) disclosed or distributed

     in source code form; (y) licensed for the purpose of making derivative works; or (z)

     redistributable at no charge;

3. TERM. The term of this Agreement ("Term") commences upon your downloading of the Specification and
      expires without notice on January 1, 2012, unless terminated sooner as provided in Section 4.

4. TERMINATION. Without prejudice to any other rights, Microsoft may terminate this Agreement if you
      fail to comply with any of the terms and conditions of this Agreement ("Termination for Cause").
      Immediately following a Termination for Cause, you must destroy all copies of the Specification in your
      possession or under your control and cease any further distribution of your Solutions that use or
      incorporate Implementations.

5. SUPPORT. Microsoft is not obligated to provide technical or other support for the Specification. You are
      responsible for any and all maintenance, end-user support, technical support and updates for your
      Solutions.

6. EXPORT RESTRICTIONS. You acknowledge that the Specification is subject to U.S. export jurisdiction.
      You agree to comply with all applicable international and national laws that apply to the Specification,
      including the U.S. Export Administration Regulations, as well as end-user, end-use and country
      destination restrictions issued by U.S. and other governments. For additional information on exporting
      Microsoft products, see http://www.microsoft.com/exporting/.

7. DISCLAIMER OF WARRANTIES. TO THE MAXIMUM EXTENT PERMITTED BY APPLICABLE LAW,
      MICROSOFT AND ITS SUPPLIERS PROVIDE TO YOU THE SPECIFICATION (AND ALL
      INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY THEREIN), AND ANY (IF ANY) SUPPORT SERVICES RELATED TO THE
      SPECIFICATION ("SUPPORT SERVICES") AS IS AND WITH ALL FAULTS; AND MICROSOFT AND
      ITS SUPPLIERS HEREBY DISCLAIM WITH RESPECT TO THE SPECIFICATION AND SUPPORT
      SERVICES ALL WARRANTIES AND CONDITIONS, WHETHER EXPRESS, IMPLIED OR STATUTORY,
      INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, ANY (IF ANY) WARRANTIES OR CONDITIONS OF OR
      RELATED TO: MERCHANTABILITY, FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE, ACCURACY OR
      COMPLETENESS OF RESPONSES, RESULTS, WORKMANLIKE EFFORT AND LACK OF NEGLIGENCE.
      ALSO THERE IS NO WARRANTY, DUTY OR CONDITION OF TITLE, QUIET ENJOYMENT, QUIET
      POSSESSION, CORRESPONDENCE TO DESCRIPTION OR NONINFRINGEMENT. THE ENTIRE
      RISK ARISING OUT OF USE OF THE SPECIFICATION (AND ALL INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY
      THEREIN) AND ANY SUPPORT SERVICES REMAINS WITH YOU.

8. EXCLUSION OF INCIDENTAL, CONSEQUENTIAL AND CERTAIN OTHER DAMAGES. TO THE

      MAXIMUM EXTENT PERMITTED BY APPLICABLE LAW, IN NO EVENT SHALL MICROSOFT OR ITS
      SUPPLIERS BE LIABLE FOR ANY SPECIAL, INCIDENTAL, INDIRECT, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
      DAMAGES WHATSOEVER (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, DAMAGES FOR LOSS OF PROFITS
      OR CONFIDENTIAL OR OTHER INFORMATION, FOR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION, FOR PERSONAL
      INJURY, FOR LOSS OF PRIVACY, FOR FAILURE TO MEET ANY DUTY INCLUDING OF GOOD
      FAITH OR OF REASONABLE CARE, FOR NEGLIGENCE, AND FOR ANY OTHER PECUNIARY OR
      OTHER LOSS WHATSOEVER) ARISING OUT OF OR IN ANY WAY RELATED TO THE USE OF OR
      INABILITY TO USE THE SPECIFICATION, ANY INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY THEREIN, THE
      PROVISION OF OR FAILURE TO PROVIDE SUPPORT SERVICES, OR OTHERWISE UNDER OR IN
      CONNECTION WITH ANY PROVISION OF THIS AGREEMENT, EVEN IN THE EVENT OF THE
      FAULT, TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE), STRICT LIABILITY, BREACH OF CONTRACT OR
      BREACH OF WARRANTY OF MICROSOFT OR ANY SUPPLIER, AND EVEN IF MICROSOFT OR ANY
      SUPPLIER HAS BEEN ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGES.

9. LIMITATION OF LIABILITY AND REMEDIES. NOTWITHSTANDING ANY DAMAGES THAT YOU
      MIGHT INCUR FOR ANY REASON WHATSOEVER (INCLUDING, WITHOUT LIMITATION, ALL
      DAMAGES REFERENCED ABOVE AND ALL DIRECT OR GENERAL DAMAGES), THE ENTIRE
      LIABILITY OF MICROSOFT AND ANY OF ITS SUPPLIERS UNDER ANY PROVISION OF THIS
      AGREEMENT AND YOUR EXCLUSIVE REMEDY FOR ALL OF THE FOREGOING SHALL BE LIMITED
      TO THE GREATER OF THE AMOUNT ACTUALLY PAID BY YOU FOR THE SPECIFICATION OR U.S.
      $5.00. THE FOREGOING LIMITATIONS, EXCLUSIONS AND DISCLAIMERS SHALL APPLY TO THE
      MAXIMUM EXTENT PERMITTED BY APPLICABLE LAW, EVEN IF ANY REMEDY FAILS ITS
      ESSENTIAL PURPOSE.

10. APPLICABLE LAW. This Agreement is governed by the laws of the State of Washington.
11. ENTIRE AGREEMENT. This Agreement is the entire agreement between you and Microsoft relating to
      the Specification and it supersedes all prior or contemporaneous oral or written communications,
      proposals and representations with respect to the Specification.

Should you have any questions concerning this EULA, or if you desire to contact Microsoft for any reason,
please contact the Microsoft subsidiary serving your country, or write: Microsoft Corporation, One Microsoft
Way, Redmond, WA 98052-6399.
Table of Contents

1.  Introduction                                      1

2.  Overview                                          1

3.  Definition of the RTP Payload Format              3

    3.1 Structure of the RTP Payload Format header    3

    3.2 Grouping and fragmentation                    4

    3.3 Grouping of multiple fragments                6

    3.4 Timing rules                                  7

    3.4.1 Timelines                                   7

    3.4.2 Time stamp wrap around                      8

    3.4.3 Decode Time and Presentation Time           8

    3.4.4 Trick play                                  9

    3.4.5 Normal Play Time                            9

    3.4.6 Send Time                                   10

    3.4.7 Correspondence                              11

    3.5 RTP header fields                             11

    3.6 Payload Format header syntax                  12

    3.6.1 Fields in the Packet Specific Info section  12

    3.6.2 Fields in the MAU Properties section        13

    3.6.3 Fields in the MAU Timing section            14

    3.7 Extensions                                    15

    3.7.1 Encrypted Payload Boundary                  15

    3.7.2 DRM Initialization Vector                   16

    3.7.3 DRM Key ID                                  16

4.  MIME registration for Windows Media Audio         17

    4.1 Required parameters                           17

    4.2 Optional parameters                           17

    4.3 SDP Parameters                                18
5.  MIME registration for Windows Media Video  18

    5.1 Required parameters                    18

    5.2 Optional parameters                    19

    5.3 SDP Parameters                         20

6.  Security Evaluation                        20

7.  References                                 22
                 RTP Payload Format for Windows Media Audio and Video

1. Introduction

This specification is organized as follows:

 Introduction to this specification document.

 Section 2 provides an overview of the Real-time Transport Protocol (RTP) Payload
     Format specification.

 Section 3 provides the RTP Payload Format specification.

 Sections 4 and 5 define the MIME parameters and SDP syntax for content in
     Windows Media Audio (WMA) and Windows Media Video (WMV) formats,
     respectively.

 Section 6 contains a security evaluation of the RTP Payload Format.

This specification defines a RTP Payload Format for content encoded using the Windows
Media Audio (WMA) or Windows Media Video (WMV) codecs. The specification also
defines MIME parameters for WMA and WMV, and defines how the parameters are
mapped to Session Description Protocol (SDP).

2. Overview

The RTP Payload Format defined in this document has been designed to encapsulate
WMV or WMA codec bit streams. The bit streams are comprised of media access units
(MAUs). This document defines how MAUs can be encapsulated in RTP.
For the purposes of this specification, a MAU is typically a single video picture or one or
more WMA packets, including start codes and padding bits.
The RTP Payload Format defines the meaning of some of the fields in the RTP header.
The syntax of the RTP header is defined in RFC-3550 [1]. The current specification also
defines a new header, which is referred to as the RTP Payload Format header.
The RTP Payload Format header, which is defined in section 3, is inserted in front of
each MAU, or fragment thereof, in the RTP packet.
Figure 1 illustrates the high-level structure of the RTP Payload Format header, and
shows how it relates to the RTP header.

© 2004 Microsoft Corporation. All rights reserved. Any reproduction, modification, or distribution is

subject to the terms of the End User License Agreement accompanying this specification.

                                                                                                       1
RTP Payload Format for Windows Media Audio and Video
Figure 1: High-level structure of RTP Payload Format header.
As shown in Figure 1, the RTP Payload Format header is divided into three sections.
Each section starts with a one-byte bit field, and is followed by one or more optional
fields. In some cases, up to two entire sections may be omitted from the RTP Payload
Format header. This can result in an RTP Payload Format header as small as one byte.
All RTP Payload Format fields should be transmitted in network byte order, which means
that the most significant byte of each field is transmitted first.
The RTP Payload Format header is followed by a payload. The payload can consist of a
complete MAU or a MAU fragment. The payload can contain a partial MAU, allowing
large MAUs to be fragmented across multiple payloads in multiple RTP packets.
The first payload can be followed by additional pairs of RTP Payload Format headers and
payloads, as permitted by the size of the RTP packet.
The first section of the RTP Payload Format header, which is called Packet Specific Info
in Figure 1, contains information that is specific to all payloads in the RTP packet.
The Packet Specific Info section is only included once in each RTP packet, in the first
RTP Payload Format header.
The second section, called MAU Properties, contains information that describes the
payload that follows the header. This section specifies whether the payload contains a
MAU that is a synchronization point (sync-point), such as a video key frame. It also
specifies how the size of the payload is determined. Additionally, this section contains
information that enables a receiver to parse the RTP packet if the previous packet was
lost. This is important if a MAU is fragmented across multiple RTP packets.
The primary purpose of the third section, called MAU Timing, is to provide information
about various time stamps that are associated with the MAU in the payload. This section
specifies how the presentation time of the MAU is determined. This section also includes
extension mechanisms that allow additional information to be included in the RTP
Payload Format header.

3. Definition of the RTP Payload Format

3.1 Structure of the RTP Payload Format header

Figure 2 shows the design of the RTP Payload Format header in greater detail. Each of
the three sections in Figure 1 consists of several individual header fields. These fields
are shown as boxes in Figure 2.

     © 2004 Microsoft Corporation. All rights reserved. Any reproduction, modification, or distribution is
                subject to the terms of the End User License Agreement accompanying this specification.

2
RTP Payload Format for Windows Media Audio and Video

Figure 2: RTP Payload Format header.

The first header field in each of the three sections is a bit field. The other header fields
in a section are present only if indicated by that section's bit field. In some cases an
entire section, including its bit field, can be omitted.

The first RTP Payload Format header in the RTP packet will always include Bit Field 1,
and may also include any of the other fields shown in Figure 2. Additional RTP Payload
Format headers in the same RTP packet always begin with similar bit fields (Bit Field 2
and Bit Field 3 in Figure 2), and can only include the fields in the MAU Properties section
and the MAU Timing section.

In the simplest possible case, an RTP packet contains a single, complete, MAU. In this
case, it is possible to include all of the header fields. However, fields that are not
needed can be omitted. Each of the three sections of the RTP Payload Format header
has a bit field that indicates which, if any, of the fields in the section are present.

© 2004 Microsoft Corporation. All rights reserved. Any reproduction, modification, or distribution is

subject to the terms of the End User License Agreement accompanying this specification.

                                                                                                       3
RTP Payload Format for Windows Media Audio and Video

For example, the Offset field, which specifies the byte offset to the end of the current
payload, is not needed when the packet contains a single payload, because the length
of the payload can be computed from the size of the RTP packet. The OP bit in Bit Field
2 indicates whether the Offset field is present. If all of the bits in Bit Field 3 are zero,
then Bit Field 3 itself can be omitted, and this is indicated by setting the B3P bit in Bit
Field 2 to zero.

3.2 Grouping and fragmentation

It is possible to combine multiple payloads in a single RTP packet. This is referred to as
grouping. The Offset field indicates the use of grouping.
If the Offset field is present, another RTP Payload Format header and another payload
may follow after the end of the current payload. The Offset field specifies the number of
bytes to the end the current payload, counted from the end of the Offset field.
To determine whether another RTP Payload Format header follows the end of the
current payload, consider both the value of the Offset field, the size of the RTP packet,
and the size of the RTP padding area, if any.
A single MAU can be split into multiple payloads. This is referred to as fragmentation.
Fragmentation is useful when a MAU is larger than a single RTP packet. The F field in Bit
Field 2 indicates whether a payload contains a complete MAU or a fragment.
The fields in the MAU Timing section should only be specified in the RTP Payload Format
header for the payload that contains the first fragment of a MAU. The only exception to
this is when the Extension field in the MAU Timing section contains a different extension
than other fragments of the same MAU. For an example of such an extension, see
section 3.7.1, Encrypted Payload Boundary extension, later in this specification.
When a MAU is fragmented, the bits S, D1, and D2 in Bit Field 2 are only significant in
the RTP Payload Format header for the payload that contains the first fragment.
Therefore, receivers must ignore these bits if the value of the F field is 0 or 2. For more
information about the F field, see section 3.6.2 later in this specification.
Fragmentation of a MAU is not recommended unless the MAU is too large to fit in a
single RTP packet. It is also generally not recommended to combine a fragment of one
MAU with another MAU or a fragment of another MAU in a single RTP packet. However,
receivers must still be able to handle these cases. An example of this is shown in Figure
3.
Figure 3 illustrates a possible sequence of three RTP packets. The three RTP packets
transport the data of four MAUs. The remainder of the fourth MAU is continued in a
fourth RTP packet (not shown). Figure 3 also illustrates that fragmented MAUs can be
used to create fixed-size RTP packets.

     © 2004 Microsoft Corporation. All rights reserved. Any reproduction, modification, or distribution is
                subject to the terms of the End User License Agreement accompanying this specification.

4
RTP Payload Format for Windows Media Audio and Video

Figure 3: Example of RTP packets containing multiple MAUs.

In Figure 3, MAU 2 is fragmented across two RTP packets. In the first RTP packet, the
RTP Payload Format header for MAU 2 specifies that MAU 2 is continued in the next RTP
packet. (This is signaled by using the F field in Bit Field 2, which is defined in section
3.6.2.)

The second RTP packet starts with an RTP Payload Format header that does not include
the MAU Timing field because the MAU Timing field for MAU 2 had already been
specified in the first RTP packet. The Offset field in the MAU Properties section is used to
specify the start of the RTP Payload Format header for MAU 3. This allows the client to
decode MAU 3 even if the previous RTP packet was lost.

© 2004 Microsoft Corporation. All rights reserved. Any reproduction, modification, or distribution is

subject to the terms of the End User License Agreement accompanying this specification.

                                                                                                       5
RTP Payload Format for Windows Media Audio and Video

Figure 3 also shows that MAU 4 is fragmented across the second and third RTP packets.
However, MAU 4 is so large that no additional MAUs can be inserted in the third RTP
packet. In this example, MAU 4 is continued in a fourth RTP packet that is not shown. In
situations such as this where a MAU is very large, the third RTP packet's RTP Payload
Format header does not need to include the Offset field, and it may be possible to omit
the entire MAU Properties section. The remaining part of the RTP Payload Format
header then consists only of the Packet Specific Info section, which can be as small as a
single byte.

3.3 Grouping of multiple fragments

If a MAU is fragmented into multiple payloads, the payloads are usually carried in
separate RTP packets. However, this RTP Payload Format also allows multiple payloads
for the same MAU to be carried within a single RTP packet. Normally, there is no benefit
in fragmenting a MAU, because extra fragmentation only increases the overhead. But
this feature may be useful when the MAUs have already been fragmented without
regard for the RTP packet size, and it is impractical to recombine the fragments into
complete MAUs prior to RTP encapsulation.
For example, a MAU may already be fragmented when DRM-encrypted content has been
stored in an ASF file [4]. In the ASF file, each MAU may be fragmented into multiple
encryption units. The encryption may make it difficult for the RTP sender to recombine
the encryption units into a single MAU. It may then be preferable to directly map each
encryption unit to a RTP payload. If the RTP payloads are small, it may be desirable to
combine several payloads into a single RTP packet.
The F field in Bit Field 2 indicates when a payload in the RTP packet contains a MAU
fragment. This field is described in greater detail in section 3.6.2.
Figure 4 shows an example where a single MAU has been split into three fragments and
all three fragments are carried in the same RTP packet.

Figure 4: Example of grouping MAU fragments.
In Figure 4, the F field in the first RTP Payload Format header is set to 1, indicating that
the first payload contains the first fragment of the MAU. The MAU Timing section should
only be present in the first payload.
The F field in the second RTP Payload Format header is set to 0, indicating that its
payload contains a fragment that is neither the first nor the last fragment of the MAU.
The F field in the third RTP Payload Format header is set to 2, indicating that its payload
contains the last fragment of the MAU.

     © 2004 Microsoft Corporation. All rights reserved. Any reproduction, modification, or distribution is
                subject to the terms of the End User License Agreement accompanying this specification.

6
                  RTP Payload Format for Windows Media Audio and Video

3.4 Timing rules

In addition to the usual RTP sampling clock and wallclock, this RTP Payload Format
specification defines several additional time stamps and notions of time, which are
described in this section.

3.4.1 Timelines

The RTP header has a single time stamp, which specifies the time at which the data in
the packet was sampled. This is sometimes called the sampling clock.

It is important to note that the RTP time stamps of packets from different media
streams should not be compared because the sampling clock may run at different
frequencies for different media streams. For example, the sampling clock of an audio
stream may run at 44,100 Hertz (Hz), while the sampling clock of a video stream will
usually run at 90,000 Hz. Furthermore, RFC-3550 specifies that the value for the initial
RTP time stamp should be chosen randomly. In effect, each media stream has its own
timeline. In this specification, each such timeline is referred to as a media timeline.

RTP allows the timelines for different media streams to be synchronized to the timeline
of a reference clock, called the wallclock. RTP senders allow the receiver to perform this
synchronization by transmitting a mapping between the sampling clock and the
wallclock in the Real-Time Control Protocol (RTCP) Sender Report packet. A different
RTCP Sender Report must be sent for each media stream because the media streams
may use different sampling clocks.

The mappings are updated and transmitted again at some interval to allow the receiver
to correct for possible drift between the wallclock and the sampling clocks. Clock drift
may still be a problem if the sender's wallclock drifts in relation to the receiver's
wallclock. The two clocks could be synchronized by using the Network Time Protocol
(NTP), for example, but the RTP specification (RFC-3550) does not specify a particular
synchronization method.

It is important to note that the wallclock originates from the encoder. If the RTP sender
and the encoder are separate entities, the wallclock is typically unrelated to any
physical clock at the sender.

This RTP Payload Format specification uses a third timeline, called the Normal Play Time
(NPT) timeline. The NPT timeline is useful primarily when RTP is used to transmit a
media presentation. Time stamps from the NPT timeline usually start at 0 at the
beginning of the presentation. NPT time stamps are particularly useful when
transmitting a pre-recorded presentation because the time stamps can assist the
receiver in specifying a playback position to seek to within the presentation. This
assumes the existence of some mechanism for the receiver to communicate the new
position to the RTP sender.

Since RTP was designed for digital media conferencing applications, the RTP
specification does not discuss the NPT timeline. However, other protocols that are built
on top of RTP include the concept of the NPT timeline. This includes protocols such as
Real Time Streaming Protocol (RTSP), a control protocol for video-on-demand
applications. In RTSP, the control protocol provides a mapping between the NPT timeline
and the media timeline for each media stream.

This RTP Payload Format specification defines a mechanism for specifying the NPT
timeline time stamp associated with a MAU. However, when practical, an out-of-band
mapping between the media timeline and the NPT timeline, such as the one defined by

© 2004 Microsoft Corporation. All rights reserved. Any reproduction, modification, or distribution is

subject to the terms of the End User License Agreement accompanying this specification.

                                                                                                       7
RTP Payload Format for Windows Media Audio and Video

RTSP, may be preferable, since it reduces the overhead of the RTP Payload Format
header.

3.4.2 Time stamp wrap around

All RTP-compliant systems are required to handle time stamp wraparound. At a typical
clock frequency of 90,000 Hz, the RTP time stamp will wrap around approximately
every 13 hours. But since the RTP specification says that a random offset should be
added to the sampling clock, a receiver may experience the first wraparound in
significantly less than 13 hours.
The wrapping around of the RTP time stamp is usually handled by using modular
arithmetic. When modular arithmetic is used, time stamps are usually compared by
subtracting one time stamp from another and observing whether the result is positive
or negative. See RFC-3550 [1] for an example of how to use modular arithmetic to cope
with time stamp wraparound.
It should be noted that at 90,000 Hz, 32 bits is sufficient for media timeline time
stamps. Using 32 bits becomes a problem only when comparing two time stamps that
are more than 6.5 hours apart.
The wallclock time is expressed by using an NTP-format time stamp. This time stamp
will wrap around in the year 2036. As with the media timeline time stamps, this should
not be a problem, as receivers should only need to examine the relative difference of
such time stamps.

3.4.3 Decode Time and Presentation Time

In this RTP Payload Format specification, each MAU has a Decode Time and a
Presentation Time. The decode time is the time by which the MAU should be delivered
to the receiver's decoder, and the presentation time is the time at which the MAU should
be presented (displayed or played) by the receiver. Both times belong to the media
timeline, described in section 3.4.1. Since the delays in the network and in the decoder
are not typically known to the RTP sender, the receiver should not use the absolute
values of a decode time stamp or a presentation time stamp. The receiver should
consider only the relative difference between a pair of decode time stamps or a pair of
presentation time stamps.
In some cases, such as when a video codec produces bi-directional video frames, MAUs
may have to be decoded in a different order than they will be presented. The RTP
sender must transmit the MAUs in the order they should be decoded.
The Timestamp field in the RTP header is normally the presentation time of the first
MAU in the RTP packet. This definition is equivalent to the concept of "sampling instant"
in RFC-3550. Alternatively, the Timestamp field can be set to the decode time of the
first MAU in the RTP packet, if this usage is negotiated through non-RTP means. Section
5.2 defines how this negotiation is done using SDP.
Since the RTP packets are transmitted in decode order, the presentation time of
consecutive MAUs may not be monotonically non-decreasing.
The RTP Payload Format header includes an optional Decode Time field, which is used to
specify the decode time of the MAU in the payload. The RTP Payload Format header also
includes a Presentation Time field which is used to specify the presentation time of the
MAU when the RTP packet contains more than one MAU.

     © 2004 Microsoft Corporation. All rights reserved. Any reproduction, modification, or distribution is
                subject to the terms of the End User License Agreement accompanying this specification.

8
                                                 RTP Payload Format for Windows Media Audio and Video

When only a single MAU is included in the RTP packet, either the Presentation Time field
or the Decode Time field is not necessary because the Timestamp field serves as a
replacement for one of those fields in the first MAU in the packet.
Both the Decode Time and the Presentation Time fields are expressed using the same
clock resolution as the Timestamp field.

3.4.4 Trick play

In this RTP Payload Format specification, the term "trick play" refers to the receiver
rendering the media presentation at a rate other than real time. Examples of trick play
include fast-forwarding and rewinding the presentation. If the RTP sender is
transmitting in trick play mode, the decode time stamp and presentation time stamp for
each MAU should increment at the real-time rate. This allows the decoder to decode the
MAUs without knowing that trick play is used.
During trick play, the Decode Time and Presentation Time fields in the RTP Payload
Format header are unaffected by trick play in that they continue to increase at their
normal real-time rate. The NPT field, if present, is affected by trick play. For example, if
a media presentation is being rewound, the Presentation Time time stamp fields of
MAUs increase, while the value of the NPT fields decrease.

3.4.5 Normal Play Time

The NPT field in the RTP Payload Format header specifies the position in the Normal Play
Time timeline to which the MAU belongs.
If the NPT field is not present, a receiver can calculate the normal play time of the MAU
from the presentation time, provided that a mapping between the two timelines is
available. Various approaches for establishing this mapping are discussed below.

© 2004 Microsoft Corporation. All rights reserved. Any reproduction, modification, or distribution is

subject to the terms of the End User License Agreement accompanying this specification.

                                                                                                       9
RTP Payload Format for Windows Media Audio and Video

Since the RTP sender adds a random offset to the time stamps in the media timeline,
the presentation time stamp cannot be used as a direct replacement for the NPT time
stamp. Even if this random offset is known to the receiver, the wrap around of the
media timeline time stamps can be an issue.
To resolve this issue, the sender can use an out-of-band mechanism to provide a
mapping between the Normal Play Time timeline and the media timeline. This mapping
could be provided only once, at the beginning of the transmission, or repeatedly as
needed. Additionally, if trick play is possible, the sender needs to communicate the trick
play rate. For example, if the presentation is being rewound, the trick play rate is
negative. The receiver uses the trick play rate to generate NPT time stamps that
decrease as the presentation time increases.
If the mapping is provided only once at the beginning of the transmission, the receiver
should establish mapping between the Normal Play Time timeline and the wallclock
timeline. This is usually possible as soon as an appropriate RTCP Sender Report packet
is received. It is preferable to calculate the NPT time stamp for each MAU based on the
MAU's wallclock time, because time stamps from the media timeline may drift against
the wallclock timeline.
The RTSP protocol is an example of a control protocol that provides a mapping between
the Normal Play Time timeline and the media timeline at the beginning of the
transmission.
Another solution that may provide a suitable trade-off between complexity and
overhead is to include the NPT field only on sync-point MAUs. The NPT field is used to
establish a mapping between the Normal Play Time timeline and the presentation or
wallclock timelines. For non-sync point MAUs, the receiver calculates the NPT time
stamp using the previously established mapping. When trick play is used, the sender
would include the NPT field for every MAU.

3.4.6 Send Time

The Send Time field in the RTP Payload Format header specifies the transmission time
of the RTP packet. This can be useful when a sequence of RTP packets is transferred
from one server to a second server. Only the first server needs to compute a
transmission schedule for the packets. The second server will forward the RTP packets
to other clients based on the value of the Send Time field.
It is not necessary to include the Send Time field when forwarding RTP packets to a
client. However, clients can use the Send Time field to detect network congestion by
comparing the difference between the values of the Send Time fields in a series of
packets against the difference in packet arrival times.
The Send Time field uses the same units as the media timeline.

     © 2004 Microsoft Corporation. All rights reserved. Any reproduction, modification, or distribution is
                subject to the terms of the End User License Agreement accompanying this specification.

10
                      RTP Payload Format for Windows Media Audio and Video

3.4.7 Correspondence

The purpose of the Correspondence field is to provide a mapping between the wallclock
timeline and the current media timeline. This is the same mapping that is provided by
RTCP Sender Reports, but the optional inclusion of this mapping in the RTP packet
allows the sender to transmit the mapping more frequently than the RTCP reporting
interval. Since including the mapping in the RTP packet is more efficient than
transmitting a separate RTCP packet, this may allow the sender to reduce the frequency
of RTCP Sender Reports, while still being able to transmit the mapping as frequently as
desired.

3.5 RTP header fields

Figure 5 illustrates the standard 12-byte RTP header. It is the same header that is
defined in RFC-3550 [1], and it is shown here for reference only.

Figure 5: Standard 12-byte RTP header.

Explanation of header fields:

Version (V) field. 2 bits. This field must always be set 2.

Padding (P) bit. This bit is used to add padding to the end of the RTP packet, as
specified in RFC-3550.

Extension (X) bit. This bit is set to 1 if an RTP header extension is present. The RTP
profile defines how the header extension is used. A receiver must be able to parse, or
skip over, the header extension should the RTP header have a non-zero Extension bit.

Contributing Source (CC) field. 4 bits. This field is used as defined in RFC-3550. A
receiver must be able to correctly parse, or skip over, the list of contributing sources
should the RTP header have a non-zero Contributing Source field.

Marker (M) bit. This bit is set to 1 if any of the payloads in the RTP packet contain
complete a MAU, or the last fragment of a MAU.

Payload Type (PT) field. 7 bits. The assignment of an RTP payload type is beyond the
scope of this specification. It is specified by the RTP profile under which this payload
format is used, or signaled dynamically out-of-band (such as by using SDP).

Sequence number field. 16 bits. This field contains a number that increments by 1 for
each RTP packet that is sent with the same SSRC value. The initial value of the RTP
sequence number may be communicated to the client through non-RTP means.

© 2004 Microsoft Corporation. All rights reserved. Any reproduction, modification, or distribution is

subject to the terms of the End User License Agreement accompanying this specification.

                                                                                                       11
RTP Payload Format for Windows Media Audio and Video

Timestamp field. 32 bits. This field specifies a time stamp that applies to the first
payload that is included in the RTP packet. By default, the field is interpreted as a
presentation time. Alternatively, the Timestamp field can be interpreted as a decode
time, if this usage is negotiated through non-RTP means. The clock frequency of the
Timestamp field is recommended to be 90 kilohertz (kHz), i.e., the resolution is
1/90,000 seconds. The sender and receiver may negotiate a different clock frequency
through non-RTP means.
Synchronization Source (SSRC) field. 32 bits. RTP packets with the same value for
the SSRC field share the same timeline for the Timestamp field and the same number
space for the Sequence Number field.

3.6 Payload Format header syntax

The RTP header is always followed by a RTP Payload Format header. The only exception
is a RTP packet that only consists of padding. In that case, the RTP Payload Format
header is not present. If a RTP packet contains data from multiple MAUs, the RTP
Payload Format header will appear in front of each MAU. Thus, RTP packets using this
payload format may contain one or more RTP payload Format headers.
The layout of the RTP Payload Format header is shown in Figure 2. When the RTP
Payload Format header directly follows the standard 12-byte RTP header, it must begin
with the one-byte field called Bit Field 1, followed by a series of optional fields. The
header is followed by a payload. The payload consists of either a complete MAU or a
fragment (partial) MAU.
After the first data payload, another RTP Payload Format header may appear, followed
by another data payload. The process of adding another RTP Payload Format header
after a data payload may be repeated multiple times. Each RTP Payload Format header
that follows the first data payload must begin with the Bit field 2 field.

3.6.1 Fields in the Packet Specific Info section

The following diagram shows the layout of the field Bit Field 1.

Figure 6: Layout of Bit Field 1.
Send Time Present (ST) bit. If this bit is 1, a 32-bit Send Time field is inserted
directly following the end of the Bit Field 1 field.
Correspondence Present (CP) bit. If this bit is 1, a 96-bit Correspondence field is
inserted after the Send Time field.
R1, R2, and R3 fields. 1 bit each. If the bit is set to 1, the receiver should assume
that a 32-bit field has been added between the Correspondence field and Bit Field 2.
The meaning of these 32-bit fields is not defined in this specification. A receiver that
does not understand the 32-bit fields must ignore them.
R4 and R5 fields. 1 bit each. Reserved for future use and must be set to 0.
Bit Field 2 Present (B2P) bit. If this bit is 1, the one-byte Bit Field 2 field is inserted
after the Correspondence field.
Send Time field. 32 bits. This field specifies the transmission time of the RTP packet,
using the same time units that are used for the Timestamp field in the RTP header.

     © 2004 Microsoft Corporation. All rights reserved. Any reproduction, modification, or distribution is
                subject to the terms of the End User License Agreement accompanying this specification.

12
                                                 RTP Payload Format for Windows Media Audio and Video
Correspondence field. 96 bits. Consists of two time stamps: A 64-bit wallclock time
stamp in NTP format and a 32-bit decode time stamp. The two fields are used in the
same way as the NTP time stamp and the RTP time stamp in the RTCP Sender Report,
which is defined in section 6.4.1 of RFC-3550.

3.6.2 Fields in the MAU Properties section

When Bit Field 1 is present, Bit Field 2 is optional. The B2P bit in Bit Field 1 determines
whether Bit Field 2 is present. The default value for all bits in Bit Field 2 is 0.

Figure 7: Layout of Bit Field 2.

Fragmentation (F) field. This field indicates whether the data payload consists of a
partial MAU. One or more payloads must be combined to reconstruct a complete MAU.
The F field also indicates whether the payload contains the first or last fragment of the
MAU.

Table 1: Meaning of F field.

F field value  Meaning

0              Payload contains fragment of MAU other than the first or last

               fragment.

1              Payload contains first fragment of MAU.

2              Payload contains last fragment of MAU.

3              Payload contains complete MAU (not fragmented.)

The S, D1 and D2 bits are only valid when the value of the F field is 0 or 3.

Offset Present (OP) bit. If this bit is 1, the 16-bit Offset field is inserted directly after
Bit Field 2. The Offset field is used to find the end of the current payload. Another RTP
Payload Format header, starting with Bit Field 2, may follow the end of the current
payload. If the Offset Present bit is 0, the Offset field is absent, and the current payload
extends to the end of the RTP packet or to the start of the RTP padding area, if the
Padding bit in the RTP header is 1.

Sync Point (S) bit. This bit is set to 1 when the MAU is a sync-point MAU.

Discontinuity (D1) bit. This bit is set to 1 to indicate that one or more MAUs are
missing even though RTP sequence number does not have a gap.

Droppable (D2) bit. If this bit is 1 and it is necessary to drop some MAUs, this MAU
can be dropped with less negative impact than MAUs that have the D2 bit set to 0.

Encryption (E) bit. Set to 1 to indicate that the payload contains encrypted data. The
bit should be set to 0 if the payload does not contain encrypted data.

Bit Field 3 Present (B3P) bit. If this bit is 1, the one-byte Bit Field 3 field is inserted
after the Length field.

Offset. A 16-bit field that specifies the offset, in bytes, to the end of the current
payload, counted from the first byte following the Offset field. In other words, the value
of the Offset field is the size of the MAU Timing section, if any, plus the size of the
current payload.

   © 2004 Microsoft Corporation. All rights reserved. Any reproduction, modification, or distribution is

   subject to the terms of the End User License Agreement accompanying this specification.

                                                                                                          13
RTP Payload Format for Windows Media Audio and Video

3.6.3 Fields in the MAU Timing section

The value of the B3P bit in Bit Field 2 determines whether Bit Field 3 is present. The
default value for all bits in Bit Field 3 is 0.

Figure 8: Layout of Bit Field 3.
Decode Time Present (D3) bit. If this bit is 1, the 32-bit Decode Time field is
inserted after Bit Field 3, but before the Presentation Time field.
Presentation Time Present (P) bit. If this bit is 1, the 32-bit Presentation Time field
is inserted after the Decode Time field, but before the NPT field.
NPT Present (N) bit. If this bit is 1, the 64-bit NPT field is inserted immediately after
the Presentation Time field.
R6, R7, R8, and R9 fields. For each of these bits that are set to 1, the receiver should
assume that a 32-bit field has been added between the NPT field and the Extension
field. The meaning of these 32-bit fields is not defined in this specification. A receiver
that does not know the meaning of the 32-bit fields must ignore them.
Extension Present (X) bit. If this bit is 1, a variable-size Extension field is inserted
after the NPT field.
Decode Time. A 32-bit field that specifies the decode time of the MAU, using the same
time units that are used for the Timestamp field in the RTP header.
Presentation Time. A 32-bit field that specifies the presentation time of the MAU,
using the same time units that are used for the Timestamp field in the RTP header.
NPT field. A 64-bit time stamp using the same time units as the RTP Timestamp field.
The NPT field specifies the position in the Normal Play Time timeline to which the MAU
belongs. See sections 3.4.4 and 3.4.5 for a description of how this field is used.

     © 2004 Microsoft Corporation. All rights reserved. Any reproduction, modification, or distribution is
                subject to the terms of the End User License Agreement accompanying this specification.

14
                                                 RTP Payload Format for Windows Media Audio and Video

Extension field. Shown in Figure 2, this field consists of one or more collections of
fields. Figure 9 illustrates the layout of the fields contained in one such collection.

Figure 9: Layout of Extension field.

L bit. If this bit is 1, this is the last collection of Extension fields. If the bit is 0, the end
of the Extension Data field is followed by at least one more collection of Extension fields
as shown in Figure 9.

Extension Type. A 7-bit field that is used to identify the contents of the Extension
Data field. Section 3.7 lists the currently defined values for the Extension Type field.
The values 0 and 127 are reserved for future use.

Extension Length. An 8-bit number giving the size, in bytes, of the Extension Data
field that appears directly following this field.

Extension Data. Variable-length field. The size of this field is given by the Extension
Length field.

3.7 Extensions

This section defines extensions that can be used in the Extension field.

3.7.1 Encrypted Payload Boundary

The fields in the Extension field have the following values when the Encrypted Payload
Boundary extension is used.
Extension Type. Must be 1.
Extension Length. Must be 1.
Extension Data. One byte. The most significant bit is referred to as the G bit. All other
bits must be set to zero by the sender and must be ignored by receivers.
The default value of the G bit is zero. Since no other bits are used in this extension, this
extension should not be included when the value of G is zero.
The G bit is used to indicate the boundaries of DRM encryption units. When certain
versions of DRM are used, a single MAU may be divided into multiple encryption units.
Each such encryption unit is transmitted as a separate payload. If an encryption unit
must be fragmented into multiple payloads, the G bit is set to 1 on all fragments except
the last one.
If the G bit is 1 and DRM is used, the receiver must reassemble the payloads into a
complete encryption unit before it can decrypt it.
If the G bit is 0 and DRM is used, the payload contains either a complete encryption
unit or the last fragment of a sequence of fragmented encryption units.
The G bit should always be 0 when DRM is not used.

3.7.2 DRM Initialization Vector

The fields in the Extension field have the following values when the DRM Initialization
Vector extension is used.

© 2004 Microsoft Corporation. All rights reserved. Any reproduction, modification, or distribution is

subject to the terms of the End User License Agreement accompanying this specification.

                                                                                                       15
RTP Payload Format for Windows Media Audio and Video
Extension Type. Must be 2.
Extension Length. The size of the Extension Data field, in bytes.
Extension Data. A sequence of one or more bytes, to be used as part of the
initialization vector for the current MAU. When this extension is present, the DRM
encryption unit is always a complete MAU. If the MAU is fragmented into multiple
payloads, the DRM Initialization Vector extension should be present only in the first
payload.
The Encrypted Payload Boundary extension, defined in section 3.7.1, must not be used
when this extension is used.

3.7.3 DRM Key ID

The fields in the Extension field have the following values when the DRM Key ID
extension is used.
Extension Type. Must be 3.
Extension Length. The size of the Extension Data field, in bytes.
Extension Data. A sequence of one or more bytes that identifies the decryption key to
use for decrypting the current payload.
The DRM Key ID extension remains effective until replaced by a different DRM Key ID
extension. Therefore, the extension is only required when a payload requires the use of
a decryption key that is different from the decryption key of the previous payload.
However, if the previous payload was contained in an RTP packet that was lost, the
receiver may be unaware that a change of decryption key is necessary. If a payload is
decrypted with the wrong key, it can lead to undesirable rendering artifacts.
One approach to reducing the severity of this issue is to specify the DRM Key ID
extension for the first payload of every MAU that is a sync-point. This is a good solution
if the lost MAU will force the receiver to discard all MAUs until it receives the next
sync-point MAU. A more conservative solution is to specify the DRM Key ID extension
for the first payload in each multiple-payload RTP packet. This solution guards against
packet loss because the interdependent payloads are all contained within a single RTP
packet.

     © 2004 Microsoft Corporation. All rights reserved. Any reproduction, modification, or distribution is
                subject to the terms of the End User License Agreement accompanying this specification.

16
                                                 RTP Payload Format for Windows Media Audio and Video

4. MIME registration for Windows Media Audio

The receiver must ignore any unspecified parameters.
Media Type name: audio
Media subtype name: wma

4.1 Required parameters

version. A case-insensitive string that specifies the version of the Windows Media
Audio codec. Table 2 shows the currently defined values of the version parameter:

Table 2: Values for WMA version parameter.

Version parameter        Description

STD                      Windows Media Audio 9 Standard

PRO                      Windows Media Audio 9 Professional

LSL                      Windows Media Audio 9 Lossless

VOICE                    Windows Media Audio 9 Voice

bitrate. The average bit rate, in bits per second, of the encoded audio stream. The
effect of RTP encapsulation is not included in this number.

blocksize. The maximum size, in bytes, of the WMA audio packets. This number is
independent of the RTP packet size, as multiple WMA audio packets can be combined in
a single RTP packet.

samplesize. The number of bits per audio sample.

preroll. The number of milliseconds worth of data that must be received before
decoding can begin to ensure smooth playback of the decoded audio stream.

config. A Base16 [3] (hexadecimal) representation of the WMA Format Header. The bits
in the Format Header are represented with the most significant bit first. If the Format
Header is not a multiple of 8 bits, up to 7 zero-valued padding bits should be added
after the last bit, to extend the Format Header to a multiple of 8 bits.

4.2 Optional parameters

profile. A number that specifies the encoding profile used in the audio stream.
samplerate. The number of samples per second in the encoded audio stream. This
parameter is optional if the a=rtpmap line in the Session Description Protocol (SDP)
specifies the sample rate. The parameter must be specified if a=rtpmap specifies an
RTP clock frequency that is different from the sample rate of the encoded audio stream.

4.3 SDP Parameters

The MIME media type audio/wma is mapped to fields in the SDP as follows:
 The media name in the m= line of SDP must be audio.
 The encoding name in the a=rtpmap line of SDP must be WMA (the MIME subtype).
 The clock frequency in the a=rtpmap line should be equal to the audio sample rate.

© 2004 Microsoft Corporation. All rights reserved. Any reproduction, modification, or distribution is

       subject to the terms of the End User License Agreement accompanying this specification.

                                                                                                       17
RTP Payload Format for Windows Media Audio and Video

 The encoding parameters section in the a=rtpmap line must be set to the number of
     channels in the audio stream.

 The optional and required parameters, described above, must be included in the
     a=fmtp line of SDP. These parameters are expressed as a semicolon separated list
     of name-value pairs. Names are separated from their corresponding values by a =
     character.

Example:
     m=audio 50000 RTP/AVP 98
     a=rtpmap:98 wma/48000/2
     a=fmtp:98 version=STD;profile=2;bitrate=64000;blocksize=8000;
          samplesize=16;preroll=3000;config=ABCDEF

5. MIME registration for Windows Media Video

The receiver must ignore any unspecified parameters.
Media Type name: video
Media subtype name: wmv

5.1 Required parameters

version. A number that specifies the version of the Windows Media Video codec. Table
3 describes the currently defined values for this parameter.

Table 3: Values for WMV version parameter.

Version parameter        Description

WMV1                     Windows Media Video 7

WMV2                     Windows Media Video 8

WMV3                     Windows Media Video 9

WMVA                     Windows Media Video Advanced Profile

bitrate. The average bit rate, in bits per second, of the encoded video stream. The
effect of RTP encapsulation is not included in this number.

width. The number of horizontal pixels in the encoded video image.

height. The number of vertical pixels in the encoded video image.

preroll. The number of milliseconds worth of data that must be received before
decoding can begin in order to ensure smooth playback of the decoded video images.

config. A Base16 [3] (hexadecimal) representation of the WMV Sequence Header. The
bits in the Sequence Header are represented with the most significant bit first. If the
Sequence Header is not a multiple of 8 bits, up to 7 zero-valued padding bits should be
added after the last bit, to extend the Sequence Header to a multiple of 8 bits.

5.2 Optional parameters

profile. A number that specifies the encoding profile used in the video stream. This
parameter should be present if the content is encoded using either the Windows Media

     © 2004 Microsoft Corporation. All rights reserved. Any reproduction, modification, or distribution is
                subject to the terms of the End User License Agreement accompanying this specification.

18
                              RTP Payload Format for Windows Media Audio and Video

Video 9 or Windows Media Video Advanced Profile codec. The concept of an encoding
profile is not applicable to content encoded using the Windows Media Video 7 and
Windows Media Video 8 codecs. The profile parameter should be omitted when those
codec versions are used. Table 4 lists the currently defined profiles.

Table 4: Values for WMV profile parameter.

Profile parameter                  Description

0                                  Simple Profile

1                                  Main Profile

3                                  Advanced Profile

level. The encoding level used in the video stream. This parameter should be present if
the content is encoded using either the Windows Media Video 9 or Windows Media Video
Advanced Profile codec. The concept of an encoding level is not applicable to WMV
content encoded using the Windows Media Video 7 and Windows Media Video 8 codecs.
The level parameter should be omitted when those codec versions are used. The
interpretation of the level parameter depends on the value of the profile parameter.
Table 5 lists the currently defined levels.

Table 5: Values for WMV level parameter.

   Level           Simple Profile  Main Profile      Advanced Profile
   parameter

   1               Low Level       Low Level         Level 1

   2               Medium Level    Medium Level      Level 2

   3                               High Level        Level 3

aspect. The aspect ratio of the encoded video image. The aspect ratio is represented as
two decimal numbers, separated by a colon (:). The first number is the aspect width,
and the second number is the aspect height. If this parameter is not specified, the
aspect ratio is 1:1.

      © 2004 Microsoft Corporation. All rights reserved. Any reproduction, modification, or distribution is

      subject to the terms of the End User License Agreement accompanying this specification.

                                                                                                             19
RTP Payload Format for Windows Media Audio and Video

ts. A string that defines the meaning of the RTP Timestamp field. The possible values
for this parameter are PTS and DTS. The default is PTS. If the value of the ts parameter
is PTS, the RTP Timestamp field specifies the presentation time of the first MAU in the
RTP packet. If the value is DTS, the RTP Timestamp field specifies the decode time of
the first MAU in the RTP packet.

5.3 SDP parameters

The MIME media type video/wmv is mapped to fields in the Session Description Protocol
(SDP) as follows:
 The media name in the m= line of SDP must be video.
 The encoding name in the a=rtpmap line of SDP must be WMV (the MIME subtype).
 The clock frequency in the a=rtpmap line should be 90000.
 The optional and required parameters, described above, must be included in the

     a=fmtp line of SDP. These parameters are expressed as a semi-colon separated list
     of name-value pairs. Names are separated from their corresponding values by a =
     character.
 The a=framerate line [2] must be present. It is used to specify the frame rate of the
     video stream.
Example:
   m=video 50000 RTP/AVP 98
   a=rtpmap:98 wmv/90000
   a=fmtp:98 version=WMV3;profile=2;level=3;ts=DTS;bitrate=300000;
     width=320;height=240;aspect=16:11;preroll=3000;config=ABCDEF
   a=framerate:24.976

6. Security Evaluation

Implementers should be aware that the Offset field in the RTP Payload Format header
could have an invalid value. An invalid value could cause an implementation to attempt
to read from unallocated memory if this situation is not handled correctly. The issue
also exists with the Extension Length header.
This RTP Payload Format specification defines two fragmentation mechanisms. The first
mechanism allows a sender to fragment a MAU across multiple payloads (section 3.2.)
Receivers can reassemble such payloads to reconstruct the original MAU.
The second fragmentation mechanism allows payloads containing DRM-encrypted data
to be fragmented into multiple payloads (section 3.7.1). Receivers can reassemble such
fragmented payloads to reconstruct the original payload.

     © 2004 Microsoft Corporation. All rights reserved. Any reproduction, modification, or distribution is
                subject to the terms of the End User License Agreement accompanying this specification.

20
                                                 RTP Payload Format for Windows Media Audio and Video

Implementers should take note that both fragmentation mechanisms are susceptible to
an attack where the attacker deliberately refrains from sending an RTP packet
containing the last fragment. Unless properly mitigated, this could cause the receiver to
tie up memory resources for an indeterminate amount of time.

An attacker could send a sequence of RTP packets with identical time stamps, or time
stamps that decrease instead of increase. Unless properly mitigated, this could cause a
receiver to buffer packets and tie up memory resources for an indeterminate amount of
time.

Receivers should also be prepared for the possibility that the data contained in the MAU
may have been deliberately corrupted by an attacker to cause a malfunction of the
decoder.

RTP and RTCP are subject to spoofing. Spoofed RTP packets can cause the receiver to
process the wrong data, possibly leading to decoder malfunction. Spoofed RTCP Sender
Report packets can cause synchronization problems, and can cause the receiver to send
RTCP Receiver Reports less frequently than required. Spoofed RTCP Receiver Report
packets can cause the server to retransmit RTP packets that were not lost, possibly
flooding the receiver with data. However, these problems are inherent to RTP and RTCP
and are not introduced by this specification.

© 2004 Microsoft Corporation. All rights reserved. Any reproduction, modification, or distribution is

subject to the terms of the End User License Agreement accompanying this specification.

                                                                                                       21
RTP Payload Format for Windows Media Audio and Video

7. References

1. "RTP: A Transport Protocol for Real-Time Applications", 2003, RFC-3550
     (http://www.ietf.org/rfc/rfc3550.txt)

2. "SDP: Session Description Protocol", RFC-2327 (http://www.ietf.org/rfc/rfc2327.txt)
3. "The Base16, Base32 and Base64 Data Encodings", RFC-3548

     (http://www.ietf.org/rfc/rfc3548.txt)
4. "Advanced Systems Format (ASF) Specification"

     (http://www.microsoft.com/windows/windowsmedia/format/asfspec.aspx)

     © 2004 Microsoft Corporation. All rights reserved. Any reproduction, modification, or distribution is
                subject to the terms of the End User License Agreement accompanying this specification.

22
